+++
title = "Zarf as a Multitool"
slug = "zarf-as-a-multitool"
date = 2023-04-24
draft = false

[taxonomies]
tags = ["zarf"]
+++

> tldr; Some cool things you can do with Zarf that are not strictly Zarf related.

<!-- more -->

## Overview

In a resource and tool constrained environment, you use the tools you have in a variety of ways they were not strictly designed for (like connecting a tablet to a video transcoder then sending that video feed across a mesh networked radio link to a receiver a kilometer away on a rooftop to hook into a fiber network to stream realtime drone footage to a command center).

In the same vein, Zarf has a variety of features that are not strictly single purpose.

### `zarf prepare sha256sum`

This command will generate a `sha256sum` file for a given file (just like the `sha256sum` command). This is useful for verifying the integrity of a file after it has been transferred to another system (if you brought the checksum with you).

### `zarf tools`

Zarf comes pre-loaded with a bunch of utilities and vendored CLIs. You can see the full list with `zarf tools`. You can also run any of these tools directly from Zarf with `zarf run <tool> <args>`.

- `crane` (alias:`registry`)
- `kubectl/wait-for`
- `k9s` (alias:`monitor`)
- `archiver`

Some tools like `kubectl` and `k9s` require no explanation, but others are less obvious.

#### `crane`

> Crane's docs <https://github.com/google/go-containerregistry/blob/main/cmd/crane/doc/crane.md>

`crane` is a CLI for interacting with container registries. It can be used to push and pull images to and from registries, but it can also be used to inspect registries and their contents (as well as log into them w/ `zarf tools registry login`).

#### `archiver`

> Archiver's docs <https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/mholt/archiver/v3#readme-command-use>

`archiver` is a CLI+library for interacting with archives. It can be used to create and extract archives of various formats (tar, zip, etc).

example:

```bash
# unpack a zarf package to do some manual inspection
$ zarf tools archiver decompress zarf-package-cool-arm64-0.0.1.tar.zst cool-unpacked

$ rm zarf-package-cool-arm64-0.0.1.tar.zst

# re-pack it up (note the `/.` at the end, this is to ensure the archive is created with the correct root)
$ zarf tools archiver compress cool-unpacked/. cool-arm64-0.0.1.tar.zst
```

### Zarf as a script runner

It is worth mentioning that in essense, Zarf component actions are really just scripts w/ some special sauce cooked up by Jeff.

If you really wanted to, you could define a component or even package that just contains scripts and run them with `zarf package deploy <path> --components=<script-name>`.

You could also define a package or a component that is only scripts and `wait-for` actions and create a deployment validator for a non Zarf deployment (with `wait-for` and `kubectl` available nearly nothing is out of reach).

### Zarf as a package manager

_Technically_ with the advent of publishing packages to a registry, Zarf is a package manager. Using the `files` noun, you can pull packages from a registry with `zarf package pull <ref>`, then you could use `zarf tools archiver decompress` to unpack the package and move things manually, or setup an install (`onDeploy`) action to do it for you.

This means that if you have access to a OCI registry, you can move files around with Zarf (dont't forget to take advantage of upload/download concurrency w/ the `--oci-concurrency <n>` flag).

## Conclusion

Zarf is a project that will keep on giving. While I do not condone some of the things I have mentioned in this post, I do think it is important to understand the full scope of what Zarf is capable of, and understand that any tool used in the right way can be a force multiplier in ways the Zarf team never intended.

> It's not a bug, it's an unintended cost-free feature.
