+++
title = "The Dangers of Init"
slug = "the-dangers-of-init"
date = 2025-06-09
draft = true

[taxonomies]
tags = ["go"]

[extra]
meta = [
    {property = "og:image", content = "https://og.razzle.cloud/og?title=The%20Dangers%20of%20Init"},
]
+++

> **TL;DR** `init()` is a very useful system for bootstrapping package-level information, but it comes at a cost.

<!-- more -->

All quotes are from the [Go language spec](https://go.dev/ref/spec).

<https://go.dev/ref/spec#Package_initialization>

## Error Handling

One of Go's major strengths is explicit error handling. If a function can fail, idiomatically it should return an error.

The signature of `init()` is similar to `main()`, it accepts nothing and returns nothing.

As such, there is no clean way to handle errors in an `init()` function.

Consider the following contrived example:

```go
var DefaultConnection *Connection

type Connection struct { ... }

func (c *Connection) Open() error { ... }

func init() {
  DefaultConnection = &Connection{...}
  DefaultConnection.Open()
}
```

Unless the reader has seen that `Open` can error, they would have no indication that the default connection could be dead (Go allows for functions that only return an error to omit the return variable if it is unused).

Using this connection could lead to runtime panics, undefined behavior and system instability.

The only way to understand `init()`'s behavior is to read the source code. It doesn't even show up under `go doc`, which means bugs in `init` will also be more likely to be missed by LLM enhanced editors like WindSurf which leverage `go doc` extensively.

The only way to communicate an error within an `init()` is to `panic`. But when does this `panic` trigger?

It triggers at runtime, specifically when the surrounding package is _first_ imported and in an order based upon the _filename_ the `init()` is defined in.

> Given the list of all packages, sorted by import path, in each step the first uninitialized package in the list for which all imported packages (if any) are already initialized is initialized. This step is repeated until all packages are initialized.
>
> ...
>
> If a package has imports, the imported packages are initialized before initializing the package itself. If multiple packages import a package, __the imported package will be initialized only once__.
>
> ...
>
> To ensure reproducible initialization behavior, build systems are encouraged to present multiple files belonging to the same package in lexical __file name order__ to a compiler.

## Performance costs

Due to `init()` running when a package is first imported, is run in a single go-routine, and has no concept of `context.Context`; `init()` can cause startup slowdown.

If the operation in an `init()` is costly, that cost is felt at program start, every single time.

For a real world example (not in Go) for why this matters: <https://nee.lv/2021/02/28/How-I-cut-GTA-Online-loading-times-by-70/>

## Avoiding the pitfalls

- Leverage `init()` sparingly
  - Certain systems (like `cobra`) favor certain patterns with `init()`, so it _may_ make sense to adopt the ecosystem's patterns.
- Favor `const` for package-level defaults as much as possible.
- If initializing a package-level default, use a pure `DefaultT() T` or `DefaultT() (T, error)` function. [example](https://github.com/charmbracelet/log/blob/4dcdb75977075373f3eca87b2b7b75ed18af3c7d/styles.go#L43)

## Further

What other footguns of `init()` have you seen?
